On the Egyptian Gods
Ἀποσπάσματα
by Leon of Pella
eul_wid: ktg-aa    eul_aid: ktg

Period   Hellenistic
Dialect  Attic
Domain   History
Format   Prose

_On the Egyptian Gods_, also known by the title _Apospasmata_ ("Extracts"), is a lost prose work attributed to Leon of Pella. It survives only in fragments preserved by later authors, which indicate it presented a euhemeristic interpretation of Egyptian mythology, arguing that the Egyptian gods were originally deified mortal kings and heroes. According to the Christian apologist Tatian, writing in the 2nd century CE, the work was framed as a letter addressed to Alexander the Great, in which Leon, described as a priest of the Egyptian sacred rites, revealed to the king out of fear of his power that the gods commonly worshipped were merely deified humans. The fragments further specify that the goddess Isis was identified by the Greeks with Demeter and was credited with the discovery of barley. The work situated these deified figures within a pseudo-historical narrative of early Egyptian kingship, claiming the Egyptians were the most ancient of peoples and that Thebes was the first city founded in Egypt.

Later Christian writers, including Tatian and Clement of Alexandria, cited Leon’s treatise as authoritative evidence for their polemical argument that pagan deities were merely deified humans, thereby employing his rationalizing approach in service of theological critiques of traditional Greco-Roman religion. The work exemplifies a Hellenistic or early Imperial intellectual tendency to systematize and historicize foreign mythologies, and its focus on Alexander the Great’s connection to the god Ammon reflects contemporary engagements with royal ideology. The Byzantine lexicon _Suda_ also records Leon as the author of the _Apospasmata_, confirming the work’s place in the tradition of antiquarian and historiographical writing about Egypt.

Text
----

t1a-6	ΠΕΡΙ ΤΩΝ ΚΑΤ’ ΑΙΓΥΠΤΟΝ ΘΕΩΝ.
1a.(t)	E LIBRO PRIMO.
1a.(t)	Schol. Apoll. Rh. IV, 262: Κόσμης δὲ ἐν πρώτῳ Αἰγυπτιακῶν καὶ Λέων ἐν πρώτῳ τῶν Πρὸς τὴν μητέρα καὶ Κνωσσὸς (Εὔδοξος?) ἐν αʹ Γεωγραφικῶν τῆς Ἀσίας πάντων ἀρχαιοτάτους τοὺς Αἰγυπτίους φασὶ, καὶ ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ πρώτην κτισθῆναι πόλιν Θήβας. Καὶ Νικάνωρ δὲ τούτοις συμφωνεῖ καὶ Ἀρχέμαχος ἐν τοῖς Μετονομασίαις.
1b	Augustinus Civ. D. VIII, 5: fictam esse illam Alexandri M. epistolam, in qua ad matrem scribit sibi a Leone quodam antistite sacrorum Aegyptiorum metu suae potestatis proditum esse, qui dii vulgo haberentur, eos homines fuisse.
2	Clem. Alex. Strom. I, 21.: Λέων δὲ ὁ τὰ Περὶ τῶν κατ’ Αἴγυπτον θεῶν πραγματευσάμενος τὴν Ἶσιν ὑπὸ Ἑλλήνων Δήμητρα καλεῖσθαί φησιν.
3	Tertullian. De coron. mil. 7: Leonis scripta evolvas, prima Isis repertas spicas capite circumtulit.
4	Augustinus. Civ. D. VIII, 27: De Iside uxore Osiris et de parentibus eorum qui omnes reges fuisse scribuntur, quibus parentibus suis illa quum sacrifi caret, invenit hordei segetem: quae et quanta mala non a poetis, sed mysticis eorum literis memoriae mandata sint, sicut Leone sacerdote prodente ad Olympiadem scribit Alexander, legant qui volunt.
5	Arnobius IV, 29: Possumus quidem hoc in loco omnes istos, nobis quos inducitis atque appellatis deos, homines fuisse monstrare, vel Agrigentino Euhemero replicato ... vel Nicagora Cyprio vel Pellaeo Leone vel Cyrenensi Theodoro vel Hippone ac Diagora Meliis vel auctoribus aliis mille.
6	Hyginus Poet. astron. II, 20: De Hammonis simulacro Leon, qui res Aegyptias conscripsit, ait: Quum Liber Aegyptum et reliquos fines regno teneret, et omnia primus hominibus ostendisse di ceretur, Hammonem quendam ex Africa venisse et pecoris multitudinem ad Liberum adduxisse, quo facilius et ejus gratia uteretur et aliquid primus invenisse diceretur. Itaque pro beneficio eius Liber existimatur agrum dedisse, qui est contra Thebas Aegyptias; et qui simulacra faciunt Hammonis, capite cornuto instituunt, ut homines memoria teneant, eum primum pecus ostendisse. Qui autem Libero factum voluerunt assignare, quod non petierit ab Hammone, sed ultro sit ad eum addu ctus, Liberi cornuta simulacra fecerunt et arietem memoriae causa inter sidera fixum dixerunt.

—
Canonical:  https://eulogikon.org/works/leon-pella-egyptian-gods-ktg-aa
License:    https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/mark/1.0/
Cite as:    eul_wid: ktg-aa

Eulogikon publishes public-domain Greek texts in cleaned, structured, readable form and makes no copyright claim over that preparation (Public Domain Mark 1.0, https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/mark/1.0/).
