Testimonies
Μαρτυρίαι
by Ocellus of Lucania
eul_wid: eoc-ab    eul_aid: eoc

Period   Classical
Dialect  Ionic
Domain   Philosophy
Format   Collection

The Testimonies is a pseudepigraphical work attributed to the Pythagorean philosopher Ocellus of Lucania. It is not a continuous treatise but a doxographical collection of eight excerpts reporting the opinions of earlier thinkers. As part of the later Pythagorean corpus, it was composed in antiquity to systematize doctrine under the authority of an early master. While the specific content of the eight passages is not detailed in major sources, the genre and attribution indicate it compiles core Pythagorean doctrines, likely including the immortality and transmigration of the soul, the cosmological and metaphysical significance of number, cosmic harmony and the central fire, and rules for ascetic and ethical living. The text survives only in these eight fragmentary excerpts. It is transmitted within the complex and late manuscript tradition of the pseudepigraphical Pythagorean writings, receiving less attention than more prominent works like the treatise On the Nature of the Universe also ascribed to Ocellus. The Testimonies itself had minimal direct influence. Its primary importance is as a minor component of the pseudepigraphical Pythagorean corpus, which collectively shaped the later Neoplatonic and medieval reception of Pythagorean thought.

Text
----

1	IAMBL. V. P. 267 Λευκανοὶ Ὄκκελος καὶ Ὄκκιλος [so] ἀδελφοί. Βυνδάκου ἀδελφή, Ὀκκελὼ καὶ Ἐκκελὼ τὼ Λευκανώ.
2	CENSORIN. 4, 3 sed prior illa sententia qua semper humanum genus fuisse creditur auctores habet Pythagoran Samium et Occelum Lucanum et Archytan Tarentinum omnesque adeo Pythagoricos.
3	PHILO de aetern. mund. p. 5, 2 Cumont ἔνιοι δ’ οὐκ Ἀριστοτέλην τῆς δόξης εὑρετὴν λέγουσιν ἀλλὰ τῶν Πυθαγορείων τινάς. ἐγὼ δὲ καὶ Ὀκέλλου [so] συγγράμματι, Λευκανοῦ γένος, ἐπιγραφομένωι Περὶ τῆς τοῦ παντὸς φύσεως ἐνέτυχον, ἐν ὧι ἀγένητόν τε καὶ ἄφθαρτον οὐκ ἀπεφαίνετο μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ δι’ ἀποδείξεων κατεσκεύαζε τὸν κόσμον εἶναι.
3a	SEXT. adv. math. X 316 ἐκ πέντε δὲ (sc. ἐγέννησαν τὰ πάντα) Ὄκκελος ὁ Λευκανὸς καὶ Ἀριστοτέλης· συμπαρέλαβον γὰρ τοῖς τέσσαρσι στοιχείοις τὸ πέμπτον καὶ κυκλοφορητικὸν σῶμα ἐξ οὗ λέγουσιν εἶναι τὰ οὐράνια.
4	DIOG. VIII 80 καλῶς ποιεῖς ὅτι ἀποπέφευγας ἐκ τᾶς ἀρρωστίας. ταῦτα γὰρ αὐτός τυ ἐπέσταλκας καὶ τοὶ περὶ Λαμίσκον ἀπάγγελον. περὶ δὲ τῶν ὑπομνημάτων ἐπεμελήθημες καὶ ἀνήλθομες ὡς Λευκανὼς καὶ ἐνετύχομες τοῖς Ὀκκέλω ἐκγόνοις. τὰ μὲν ὦν Περὶ νόμω καὶ Βασιληίας καὶ Ὁσιότατος καὶ τᾶς τῶ παντὸς γενέσιος αὐτοί τε ἔχομες καὶ τὶν ἀπεστάλκαμες ... (81) τὰ μὲν παρὰ σοῦ ἐλθόντα ὑπομνήματα θαυμαστῶς ἄσμενοί τε ἐλάβομεν καὶ τοῦ γράψαντος αὐτὰ ἠγάσθημεν ὡς ἔνι μάλιστα, καὶ ἔδοξεν ἡμῖν ἁνὴρ ἄξιος ἐκείνων τῶν παλαιῶν προγόνων. λέγονται γὰρ δὴ οἱ ἄνδρες οὗτοι Μυραῖοι εἶναι (οὗτοι δ’ ἦσαν τῶν ἐπὶ Λαομέδοντος ἐξαναστάντων Τρώων), ἄνδρες ἀγαθοί, ὡς ὁ παραδεδομένος μῦθος δηλοῖ ...
5	SYR. in Metaph. 175, 7 Kroll οὔτε τὸν περὶ τῶν αἰσθητῶν λόγον πάντηι παρελίμπανον ὡς δηλοῖ τὰ Ἐκέλλου μὲν Περὶ τᾶς τῶ παντὸς φύσιος, ἐξ ὧν τὰ Περὶ γενέσεως καὶ φθορᾶς μονονουχὶ μεταβεβλῆσθαι δοκεῖ, τοῦ Τιμαίου δὲ τὰ πλεῖστα (!).
6	STOB. Ecl. I 20, 3 Ὀκέλλου ... ἐν τοῖς Περὶ τᾶς τοῦ παντὸς φύσεως. I 13, 2 ἐν τῶι Περὶ νόμου.
8	I. Lyd. de mens. II 8 [p. 27, 4 W.] ἴσμεν γάρ, ὅτι ἡ τριὰς τὴν τῶν θείων πρόοδον ἐκίνησε καὶ στάσιν αὐτοῖς τὴν αἰώνιον ἀπειργάσατο ἐν τῶι αὐτῶι εἴδει, ὥς φησιν Ὄκελλος ὁ Πυθαγόρειος ῥήμασι τούτοις· ‘ ἡ τριὰς πρώτη συνέστησεν ἀρχή ν , μεσότητα καὶ τελευτήν ‘.

—
Canonical:  https://eulogikon.org/works/ocellus-lucania-testimonies-eoc-ab
License:    https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/mark/1.0/
Cite as:    eul_wid: eoc-ab

Eulogikon publishes public-domain Greek texts in cleaned, structured, readable form and makes no copyright claim over that preparation (Public Domain Mark 1.0, https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/mark/1.0/).
