Histories Concerning Philopator
Ἀποσπάσματα
by Ptolemy of Megalopolis
eul_wid: kri-aa    eul_aid: kri

Period   Hellenistic
Dialect  Koine (frg)
Domain   History
Format   Prose

The Histories Concerning Philopator is a lost historical work by Ptolemy of Megalopolis, which focused on the reign of Ptolemy IV Philopator of Egypt from 221 to 204 BCE. The work survives only in fragmentary quotations preserved by later authors, including Clement of Alexandria, Arnobius, and Athenaeus. These citations, drawn from at least three books, indicate the history covered a range of subjects pertinent to Philopator's court and era. The fragments reference the tomb of the legendary king Cinyras and his descendants at the temple of Aphrodite in Paphos, describe court entertainers known as geloiastai who were summoned to royal symposia from across the city, and note royal cupbearers and the mistresses of kings. The title of the work as recorded by the 9th-century Byzantine scholar Photius, Apospasmata or "Selections," suggests the text known in later antiquity may have been an epitome or that the surviving citations are themselves extracts from a more comprehensive history. As a contemporary account originating from within the Ptolemaic sphere, the fragments of this work provide a valuable, though limited, counterpoint to the narratives of external historians like Polybius and are crucial primary evidence for modern reconstructions of Ptolemaic court life and the political history of the period.

Text
----

t1-4	ΑΙ ΠΕΡΙ ΤΟΝ ΦΙΛΟΠΑΤΟΡΑ ΙΣΤΟΡΙΑΙ.
1a.(t)	E LIBRO PRIMO.
1a.(t)	Clemens Alex. Protr. c. 3: Πτολεμαῖος δὲ ὁ τοῦ Ἀγησάρχου ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ τῶν Περὶ τὸν Φιλοπάτορα ἐν Πάφῳ λέγει ἐν τῷ τῆς Ἀφροδίτης ἱερῷ Κινύραν τε καὶ τοὺς Κινύρου ἀπογόνους κεκηδεῦσθαι.
1b	Arnobius VI, 4: Agesarchi Ptolemaeus de Philopatore quem edidit primo Cinyram regem Paphi cum familia omni sua, imo cum omni prosapia in Veneris templo situm esse literarum auctoritate de clarat.
2.(t)	E LIBRO SECUNDO.
2.(t)	Athenaeus VI: Πτολεμαῖος δ’ ὁ τοῦ Ἀγησάρχου, Μεγαλοπολίτης γένος, ἐν τῇ δευτέρᾳ τῶν Περὶ τὸν Φιλοπάτορα ἱστοριῶν συμπότας φησὶ τῷ βασιλεῖ συνάγεσθαι ἐξ ἁπάσης τῆς πόλεως, οὓς προσα γορεύεσθαι γελοιαστάς.
3.(t)	E LIBRO TERTIO.
3.(t)	Idem X: Κλεινοῦς δὲ τῆς οἰνοχόου Πτολεμαίου τοῦ βασιλέως, ἐπίκλην δὲ Φιλαδέλφου, μνημονεύει Πτολεμαῖος ὁ τοῦ Ἀγησάρχου, ἐν τῇ τρίτῃ τῶν περὶ Φιλοπάτορα ἱστοριῶν.
4	Idem XIII: *PTOLEMAÎOS D’ O( TOÛ Ἀγησάρχου ἐν ταῖς περὶ τὸν Φιλοπάτορα ἱστορίαις βασιλέων ἐρωμένας ἀναγράφων, φησί· «Φιλίππου τοῦ Μακεδόνος αὐξήσαντος Φίλινναν τὴν ὀρχηστρίδα, ἐξ ἧς καὶ γεννῆσαι Ἀριδαῖον, τὸν μετὰ Ἀλέξανδρον βασιλεύσαντα· Δημητρίου δὲ τοῦ Πολιορκητοῦ μετὰ τὰς προειρημένας Μανίαν, Ἀντιγόνου δὲ Δημὼ, ἐξ ἧς Ἀλκυονέα γεννηθῆναι, Σελεύκου δὲ τοῦ νεωτέρου Μύσταν καὶ Νῦσαν.»

—
Canonical:  https://eulogikon.org/grc/ptolemy-of-megalopolis/histories-philopator
License:    https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/mark/1.0/
Cite as:    eul_wid: kri-aa

Eulogikon publishes public-domain Greek texts in cleaned, structured, readable form and makes no copyright claim over that preparation (Public Domain Mark 1.0, https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/mark/1.0/).
