Fables
Μῦθοι
by Aesop the Fabulist
eul_wid: aqo-aq    eul_aid: aqo

Period   Archaic
Dialect  Mixed Dialects
Domain   Fiction
Format   Prose

The Fables attributed to Aesop constitute a foundational collection of concise, didactic narratives, typically employing animals with human traits to convey lessons of practical wisdom. Each tale concludes with an explicit moral, known as an epimythium or promythium. Although traditionally associated with the semi-legendary Aesop, a Thracian or Phrygian slave said to have lived in the 6th century BCE, the fables represent a fluid oral tradition that was later systematized into written compilations. They are primarily preserved in prose form, though they were subsequently adapted into verse by authors such as Babrius in Greek and Phaedrus in Latin.

The narratives explore enduring themes of human and social conduct. They frequently champion practical wisdom and the consequences of action, as seen in the tale of the industrious ant and the improvident grasshopper. A common motif is the triumph of cunning over brute strength, exemplified by the story of a mouse freeing a lion from a net. The fables also offer sharp critiques of human frailty, including hypocrisy and self-deception, illustrated by the fox who dismisses unreachable grapes as sour. Warnings concerning social ethics and the breakdown of trust are equally prominent, most famously in the parable of the shepherd who falsely cried wolf.

No original writings by Aesop survive. The fables circulated widely in oral tradition for centuries before being assembled into prose collections, the most important of which is the Augustana compilation dating from the first or second century CE. The standard corpus largely derives from later redactions, particularly the Greek verse versions of Babrius and the Latin verse adaptations of Phaedrus. The significance of Aesop's Fables in Western literature and thought is profound. They were essential tools in ancient rhetoric and education, were adapted by Roman authors and medieval beast epics, and were revitalized in the 17th century by Jean de La Fontaine. Their legacy endures as a cornerstone of global children's literature and a ubiquitous source of metaphorical language.

Text
----

[1]	ΣΥΣ, ΙΠΠΟΣ ΚΑΙ ΚΥΝΗΓΕΤΗΣ Πρὸς τὸ(ν) ἰσχυ(ρὸν) τὸν καὶ (ἄ)λλοις (οὐκ ἀντέχοντα καὶ εὐχάλι)νον ὅδε λόγος ἐφ(α)ρμόζει. (Ἵ)ππος καὶ ὗς λειμῶνος ἐκοινών(ο)υν. ὁ δὲ ὗς ἐλυμαίνε(τ)ο τ(ὰς πηγ)ὰς καὶ τὰς πόας τοῦ ἵππου διέφθειρεν. Πολλάκις δὲ τοῦ (ἵ)ππο(υ) ... ΠΟΙΜΗΝ ΚΑΙ ΠΡΟΒΑΤΑ Κατὰ τῶν (τοὺς μὲ)ν ἄ(λ)λους εὖ ποιούντων, τοὺς δὲ φίλους κακῶς ὅδε λόγος ἐφαρμόζει.
2 (t)	Ποιμὴν θεὶς τὸ ἱμάτιον 〈καὶ〉 ἀναβὰς ἐπὶ δρῦν ἐράβδιζεν τῶν βαλάνων τοῖς προβάτοις. τ(ὰ) δὲ πρόβατα περί τε τῶν βαλάνων ἐμαχήσαντο καὶ τὸ ἱμάτιον αὐτοῦ διέφθειραν. καταβὰς δὲ καὶ ἰδὼν τὸ συμβεβηκὸς (εἶπεν)· ὦ κάκ(ιστα) πρ(ό)β(α)τα, (ὑμεῖ)ς (ἄ)λλοις τὰ ἔρι(α) ... ΗΡΑΚΛΗΣ ΚΑΙ ΠΛΟΥΤΟΣ Πρὸς τὸν πλούσιον ἴσα καὶ πονη(ρὸν) ὅδε λόγος ἐφαρμόζει.
3 (t)	Ὁ Ζεὺς τ(ὸν) Ἡρακλῆ (ὡ)ς εἰς θεοὺς ἄ(ξων εἱσ)τία καὶ τ(οὺ)ς ἄλλους θεοὺς ἐκάλεσεν ἐπ(ὶ) τὸ δεῖπνον. ἐπιόν(τα δὲ) ἕκαστον τῶν θεῶν ὑ(π)ερβολ(ῇ) ἠσπάζετο ὁ Ἡρα(κλ)ῆς, (τ)οῦ (δὲ Πλού)του ἐσχάτου προσ(ιόντ)ος (ἄφνω κύ)ψας κάτω ὁ Ἡρακλῆς οὐ πρ(οση)γόρευσεν αὐτόν. τοῦ Διὸς θαυμάσαντος καὶ ἐρωτήσαντος τὸν Ἡρακλῆ, διὰ τί τοῦ(το ἐ)ποίησεν, ἀπεκρίνατο, 〈ὅ〉τι ὦ πάτερ, ἔγωγε τοῦτον ἐπίσταμαι ἀεὶ μετὰ τῶν πονηροτάτων ἀνθρώπω(ν δ)ιατρίβοντα καὶ μετὰ τούτω(ν συ)μβουλόμενον. ἀτὰρ ὁ Π(λοῦτος εἶπε·) ἄνθρωπε πονη(ρότατε, ἔργῳ ὅτ)αν ὁ Πλοῦτος παρα(γ)ίν(ηται, ἐᾷς), νῦν τῷ λόγῳ παρ(οξύν)ῃ ... ΓΛΑΥΞ ΚΑΙ ΟΡΝΙΘΕΣ .
4 (t)	.. ἰξο(φόρον δ)ρῦν ἀναφ(υομένην) ᾔσ(θετο, τοῖ)ς ὀρνέοις ἐπηπείλει (τὴν δρῦν) ἀναφυεῖσαν μὲν ἔσεσ(θαι κακ)ὸν τῷ γένει τῶν ὀρν(έ)ων. (τὸν λόγο)ν δ’ αὐτῶν ὀλιγ(ωρούντων) (ἡ δρῦς) ηὐξήθη, λαβὼν δ(έ τι)ς ἀν(ὴρ ἰξευτὴς) ἀπὸ τῆς δρυὸς τὸν ἰξὸν (ἐθήρασ)εν, τὰ δὲ ὄρνεα ὁρῶντα (μετενόουν) καὶ ἔφησα(ν) δεινὴν (εἶναι τὴν) γλαῦκα τὸ μέλλον προ(μαντε)ύε(σ)θαι. καὶ νῦν ὅταν ἴδω(σι τὴν γ)λαῦκα περίπετον, εἰ καὶ ἀ(πὸ τῶν ἄλλ)ων ἀπέχει, συμ(βουλ)εύ(ειν λίσ)σ(ονται). ἡ δὲ λέγει· [π] ὦ πονη(ρά, αἰσχ)ύ(ν)εσθε νῦν καὶ μιμνή(σκεσθ)ε; ὅτ(ε) οὐδὲ λ̣ι̣ . ( .. ) ἢ̣ ἔ̣τ̣ι̣ π̣λει( ...... ) ἦν, ὅτε δ’ ἦν ( . )οθλ̣( . ) . α( . ), ( . ὤραν οὐ)κ ἔσχετε τῆς ἐ(μῆς συμβουλῆς). ἀτὰρ οὖν καὶ ὑμ(εῖς τότε οὐ μνησθ)έντες ἐμοῦ, νῦν( .... )κ̣( ......... ) ὅτε οὐδὲ . ( ...... ...... ) τού(τ)ῳ τοίνυν τῷ λ(όγ)ῳ (ἐπλήγ)ησαν καὶ τὴν γνώμην (φαίνον)ται αὐτῶν εἰρηκέναι λέ(γ)ον(τες· οὕτ)ως οὐδὲν ὄφελος ὕστερον ...

—
Canonical:  https://eulogikon.org/grc/aesop/fables-aq
License:    https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/mark/1.0/
Cite as:    eul_wid: aqo-aq

Eulogikon publishes public-domain Greek texts in cleaned, structured, readable form and makes no copyright claim over that preparation (Public Domain Mark 1.0, https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/mark/1.0/).
